---
layout: post
title: Note to Self
---

One of the cool things about Git is that it has strong cryptographic 
integrity.  If you change any bit in the commit data or any of the files it
keeps, all the checksums change, including the commit SHA and every commit
SHA since that one.  However, that means that in order to amend the commit
in any way, for instance to add some comments on something or even sign off
on a commit, you have to change the SHA of the commit itself.

Wouldn't it be nice if you could add data to a commit without changing it's
SHA?  If only there existed an external mechanism to attach data to a commit
without modifying the commit message itself.  Happy day!  It turns out there
exists just such a feature in newer versions of Git!  As we can see from the
Git 1.6.6 release notes where this new functionality was first introduced:

    * "git notes" command to annotate existing commits.

Need any more be said?  Well, maybe.  How do you use it?  What does it do?
How can it be useful?  I'm not sure I can answer all of these questions, but
let's give it a try.  First of all, how does one use it? 

Well, to add a note to a specific commit, you only need to run 
`git notes add [commit]`, like this:

    $ git notes add HEAD

This will open up your editor to write your commit message.  You can also use
the `-m` option to provide the note right on the command line:

    $ git notes add -m 'I approve - Scott' master~1

That will add a note to the first parent on the last commit on the master 
branch.  Now, how to view these notes?  The easiest way is with the `git log`
command.


    $ git log master
    commit 0385bcc3bc66d1b1ec07346c237061574335c3b8
    Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    Date:   Tue Jun 22 20:09:32 2010 -0700

      yield to run block right before accepting connections

    commit 06ca03a20bb01203e2d6b8996e365f46cb6d59bd
    Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    Date:   Wed May 12 06:47:15 2010 -0700

      no need to delete these header names now

    Notes:
      I approve - Scott

You can see the notes appended automatically in the log output.  You can only
have one note per commit in a namespace though (I will explain namespaces in
the next section), so if you want to add a note to that commit, you have to
instead edit the existing one.  You can either do this by running:

    $ git notes edit master~1

Which will open a text editor with the existing note so you can edit it:

    I approve - Scott

    #
    # Write/edit the notes for the following object:
    #
    # commit 06ca03a20bb01203e2d6b8996e365f46cb6d59bd
    # Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    # Date:   Wed May 12 06:47:15 2010 -0700
    # 
    #     no need to delete these header names now
    # 
    #  kidgloves.rb |    2 --
    #  1 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 2 deletions(-)
    ~                                                                               
    ~                                                                               
    ~                                                                               
    ".git/NOTES_EDITMSG" 13L, 338C

Sort of weird, but it works.  If you just want to add something to the end of
an existing note, you can run `git notes append SHA`, but only in newer
versions of Git (I think 1.7.1 and above).

## Notes Namespaces ##

Since you can only have one note per commit, Git allows you to have multiple
namespaces for your notes.  The default namespace is called 'commits', but 
you can change that.  Let's say we're using the 'commits' notes namespace to
store general comments but we want to also store bugzilla information for our
commits.  We can also have a 'bugzilla' namespace.  Here is how we would add 
a bug number to a commit under the bugzilla namespace:

    $ git notes --ref=bugzilla add -m 'bug #15' 0385bcc3

However, now you have to tell Git to specifically look in that namespace:

    $ git log --show-notes=bugzilla
    commit 0385bcc3bc66d1b1ec07346c237061574335c3b8
    Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    Date:   Tue Jun 22 20:09:32 2010 -0700

      yield to run block right before accepting connections

    Notes (bugzilla):
      bug #15

    commit 06ca03a20bb01203e2d6b8996e365f46cb6d59bd
    Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    Date:   Wed May 12 06:47:15 2010 -0700

      no need to delete these header names now

    Notes:
      I approve - Scott

Notice that it also will show your normal notes.  You can actually have it show
notes from all your namespaces by running `git log --show-notes=*` - if you
have a lot of them, you may want to just alias that.  Here is what your log
output might look like if you have a number of notes namespaces:

    $ git log -1 --show-notes=*
    commit 0385bcc3bc66d1b1ec07346c237061574335c3b8
    Author: Ryan Tomayko <rtomayko@gmail.com>
    Date:   Tue Jun 22 20:09:32 2010 -0700

        yield to run block right before accepting connections

    Notes:
        I approve of this, too - Scott

    Notes (bugzilla):
        bug #15

    Notes (build):
        build successful (8/13/10)

You can also switch the current namespace you're using so that the default for
writing and showing notes is not 'commits' but, say, 'bugzilla' instead.  If you
export the variable `GIT_NOTES_REF` to point to something different, then the
`--ref` and `--show-notes` options are not neccesary.  For example:

    $ export GIT_NOTES_REF=refs/notes/bugzilla

That will set your default to 'bugzilla' instead.  It has to start with the 'refs/notes/' though.

## Sharing Notes ##

Now, here is where the general usability of this really breaks down.  I am
hoping that this will be improved in the future and I put off writing this post
because of my concern with this phase of the process, but I figured it has 
interesting enough functionality as-is that someone might want to play with it.

So, the notes (as you may have noticed in the previous section) are stored as
references, just like branches and tags.  This means you can push them to a 
server.  However, Git has a bit of magic built in to expand a branch name 
like 'master' to what it really is, which is 'refs/heads/master'. Unfortunately,
Git has no such magic built in for notes.  So, to push your notes to a server,
you cannot simply run something like `git push origin bugzilla`.  Git will do 
this:

    $ git push origin bugzilla
    error: src refspec bugzilla does not match any.
    error: failed to push some refs to 'git@github.com:schacon/kidgloves.git'

However, you can push anything under 'refs/' to a server, you just need to be
more explicit about it.  If you run this it will work fine:

    $ git push origin refs/notes/bugzilla
    Counting objects: 3, done.
    Delta compression using up to 2 threads.
    Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
    Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 263 bytes, done.
    Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
    To git@github.com:schacon/kidgloves.git
     * [new branch]      refs/notes/bugzilla -> refs/notes/bugzilla

In fact, you may want to just make that `git push origin refs/notes/*` which
will push all your notes.  This is what Git does normally for something like
tags.  When you run `git push origin --tags` it basically expands to 
`git push origin refs/tags/*`.

Now we're going to get a bit esoteric - forgive me. A shortcut you can use is 
to add a `fetch` refspec to your `.git/config` file.  If you look at your config
file, it probably has a section that looks something like this:

    [remote "origin"]
      url = git@github.com:schacon/kidgloves.git
      fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*

This means for the remote named 'origin', the URL to interact with is that 
github one and when you run 'git fetch origin', take all the branches under
`refs/heads` on the server and put them into `refs/remotes/origin` locally.
So, `master` on the server becomes `origin/master` locally.  If you change
that line to be:

      fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/manamana/*

Then after the next `git fetch origin`, the 'master' branch on the server
will be `manamana/master` locally.  The '+' at the beginning means 'just
blindly overwrite the values' - don't check for fast-forwardability.

Now, the trick here for pushing notes easily is to add lines telling Git 
what you want it to do when you run `git push origin`.  By default, Git 
will push every reference it has locally that the server also has (ie: it pushes
all branches that have the same name on the server).  You can overwrite this
default by setting the `push.default` setting, which I prefer to have as 'matching' - I'm getting off topic now, I'll do another post on this later.

Anyhow, you can tell git what you want it to do when you run `git push origin`
by setting `push` lines in your config.  If you add these lines:

      push = refs/heads/*:refs/heads/*
      push = refs/notes/*:refs/notes/scott/*

Then when you run `git push origin`, Git will try to push all your local 
references up to be references on the server. (Don't put a '+' at the beginning,
or it's like running `git push -f` every time).  It will also push all your
notes up to be namespaced by 'scott' on the server.  So people will see your
bugzilla notes as 'scott/bugzilla'.  If you want everybody to use the same
notes namespaces, just leave out the 'scott/'.

You can also have Git fetch notes by default, which it also will not do.  If
you add this line to the same section:

      fetch = +refs/notes/*:refs/notes/origin/*

Then Git will also get all the notes on the server, and in this case namespace 
them with 'origin/'.  The issue here is that then you have the 'bugzilla' note
you made locally also under 'origin/scott/bugzilla' after you push it up and 
pull it back down again.  This can get messy.  However, the issue is that you
need to be careful with these notes because they're super difficult to merge,
which means if you create a note and push it, then someone else fetches and 
modifies it and in the meantime you also modify it, it's really hard to merge
them together.

Because of this, it's probably best to namespace your notes like I've shown or
just have an automated process create them (like build statuses or bugzilla
artifacts).

